Understanding, many of the communists are returning to the old union. There is also hope in the fact that the employers are combining regardless of nationality or politics, and the workmen are beginning to see they must do the same. May they soon see the light and consolidate themselves into one body. The officials we met would, we are certain, welcome it and do all possible to make it a success.
A word may be inserted here of the general activity of the Social democratic unions which is shown in a very fine building they have built in prague for the offices of the trade union federation, and a number of the unions. A picture of the front of it appeared in the daily herald of 31st July. It is well equipped for its purpose, containing five floors with commodious rooms for the different unions. It also possesses a very nice hall for conference purposes or meetings, and a restaurant of an up-to-date character. Not the least interesting feature of it is that it was built with Government help in the shape of a substantial money grant 
the co-operative movement is also active and successful, the social democrats having officially decided in 1901 that it was their duty to support it. We visited several shops and were impressed by their apparent efficiency, those in charge were readily showing us over the different departments. There is one shop that sells the various costumes and dresses issued by the sports organisation: this is for the whole of the Czecho-Slovakia and ensure uniformity and low selling prices. We also, on the Saturday morning, visited a co-operative bakery. Established in 1907, it then employed seven people; its staff to-day is 329 and they produce 150,000 loaves of bread a week, besides fancy roll and pastries. It is a fine building not so good and well equipped perhaps as some in this country, but a splendid manifestation of working-class effort.

There are many other matters of interest that we were informed of and witnessed during our stay, but we have confused ourselves to explaining in brief form those that are associated mainly with working-class effort, or that are related to working-class con-  ditions’ the general public endeavour, however, is of a high order as reflected in their parks, public halls and art galleries, showing an evident determination to put civic adminis tration on as high a level as possible. We may perhaps add that we visited on the Sunday a co-operative farm. this was originally the property of a nobleman, but was taken over with the land in the early days of the revolution. The old steward is still retained as manager, and the farm is well equipped with machinery and stock. Our visit was too short to enable us to obtain as much information as we would wish, but we saw sufficient to convince us of the practical way in which they have dealt with their land problem since the war.

On the Monday we commenced our visits to the boot factories, the first being messrs. T. L. Poper, of Chrudim. We reached this place at midday, and had a meal at a Labour Temple or workers’ home. This is a fine building which contained a good restaurant, a large meeting hall, a small hall, a room used as a library, and a children’s theatre. It was built by the shoemakers of the town at the cost of 2,000, 000k., or £12, 500; evidently the shoemakers in Czecho-Slovakia are in the forefront of the progressive forces. We were received at the factory by the manager, Mr. Zaba, who could speak English, having some years lived in England and worked at T. Brown’s Leicester. The principals, Mr. Popper and his son, also spoke English, but were engaged with customers; we saw them, however, before we left and their greeting to us was very cordial. The factory is new, having being built last year. It is perhaps one of the best we have seen, the different having being built last year. It is perhaps one of the best we have seen, the different floors (it was a five-storey building) were well lighted and equipped, the operatives having ample space in which o work. On every floor a woman was continually engaged in sweeping up; not a particle of dust or anything was left about ; she had a small iron trolley on wheels, and with dustpan and brush she moved round gathering up anything that lay about ; you cannot imagine a cleaner factory
The relationship with the union was very good, an agreement having been made under which not only are wages fixed, but the firm pay 30 per cent of wages during sickness on top of the 60 per cent paid by the state. The state compels a week’s holiday with pay after one year’s service; the firm gives this if the operative has been there only one week. Excellent provisions are made for the operatives in the erection of the seventeen shower-bath, well arranged, while round the very ample room that is used for hanging their clothes, wash-basins are also provided. We were informed here that if a firm wants clean work they must provide the means for clean operatives. Workmen are not dis- charged when old, but small pensions are granted. The firm evidently believe that good shoes can only be produced from good material, as they purchase in the best markets and obtain their supplies from Germany, Austria and England – we saw some from Leicester – also using home productions. The firm was very short of work, a reduced number of operatives working 36 hours a week. The capacity of the factory would easily be 12,000 a week. We saw little juvenile labour, and evidently the women continue on in the factory longer than they do in most places at home. The class of goods manufactured range from small children’s to men’s, with all varieties in between, including children’s 7 to 1 welted boots. All the goods were of the best material and workmanship, their producing being of a high order. The machines used and methods adopted being similar to our wown. 
